---
layout: post
title:  Spotlight - NBA
description: Taking a look at the NBA's murky view on human rights for some.
date:   2019-04-15 12:00:00 +00:00
image:  '/images/portals.jpg'
---
“​No longer will prejudice and fear force gay athletes to remain silent about a
fundamental part of their lives. By coming out and living openly while still an active NBA player, Collins has courageously shown the world that one's sexual orientation is no longer an impediment to achieving one's goals, even at the highest levels of professional sports.”
-Chad Griffin, Human Rights Campaign (Bloomekatz)

The president of the Human Rights Campaign saw a major change coming to the worlds of major athletes around the United States immediately after Jason Collins’–a seven foot tall, NBA center–emerged as the country’s first openly gay professional player. And many other predicted a major shift coming too. The National Basketball Association had finally welcomed its first gay player, and his announcement met positive attitudes from the media and the biggest voices in the sport. But five years later, not a single openly gay athlete after Collins has stepped on the court, field, or rink in America’s four biggest professional leagues (Buzinski). For a sport that has considered itself at the forefront of change, the NBA has not seen a single gay athlete amongst its hundreds of players. The transformative storyline between Jason Collins and Dwight Howard certainly embraces that notion.

In November 2018, a transgender woman accused Dwight Howard of forcing her to sign a nondisclosure agreement about their alleged sexual relationship. Thousands of fans on Twitter teased Howard for his sexual orientation, with many commenters reexamining his past physical encounters on the court and suggesting that any touching that happened was truly enjoyable for Dwight, while other Twitter users suggested his wardrobe would change and he would eagerly be awaiting post-game locker rooms. The welcoming reaction to sexual identity received by Collins was nowhere to be found five years later. Why, five years after Collins major declaration, does a similar LGBT issue cause monstrous attacks and incessant jokes against Howard? Perhaps by better understanding the homosocial reality of men, we could provide greater insight to this major gap in acceptance.

Michael Kimmel’s “Masculinity as Homophobia: Fear, Shame, and Silence in the Construction of Gender Identity” explores the ideas of homosexuality being perceived as powerless and weak. He notes that “manhood is demonstrated for other men’s approval” and that “we test ourselves, perform heroic feats, take enormous risks, all because we want other men to grant us our manhood” (33). Dwight Howard’s career has often been characterized as soft, and his teammate, Kobe Bryant, had once called him a “teddy bear” (Gomez). Along this line, Kimmel wrote that “Homophobia is a central organizing principle of our cultural definition of manhood...Homophobia is the fear that other men will unmask us, emasculate us, reveal to us and the world that we are not real men” (35). While Collins controlled his announcement and had a reputable career as a strong post player Howard both lost control of his sexual narrative and was well known for being a weak basketball player. And as for explaining the animosity of the Twiter trolls against Howard, perhaps they were enacting “a defense against the perceived threat of humiliation in the eyes of other men,” or better yet, themselves (39). Upon looking at Howard’s story arc, we now understand why the excitement of acceptance for Collins has been ejected from play, while hatred and monstrisizing subs into the game.

Kimmel’s insight is certainly one fruitful way to connect the gaps in the Howard and Collins stories. And while utilizing his text as the primary litmus test for why certain sexual orientation announcements in the media are greeted with welcoming verses disgust is certainly one way to look at it, I would like to venture out of the homosocial lens and into the realm of the media narrative. We live in an age of social media dominance, and maybe by looking at this story from a media perspective we can highlight the reason behind conflicting narratives under the spotlight.

Perhaps the gap in acceptance of transgender issues and homosexuals could bridge the two conflicting narratives we witness here. According to a survey by Vox, 30% of Americans hold somewhat unfavorable or very unfavorable views towards transgender people. Notably, NRA members were less disliked than transgender individuals, and homosexuals scored 22% on that same vote (Lopez). There does seem to be a slightly more favorable opinion towards homosexuals when compared to transgenders, and that could be magnified by the NBA community in terms of where that gap in homophobia and transphobia appears.

But a second, more problematic, issue arises when accepting this hypothetical: homophobia, not transphobia, was the primary center of the jokes made by thousands in the Twitter community. To further analyze this, we must better understand the situational framing in which each situation occurred. Howard’s story popped up without his own control, and due to the questionable veracity of which the story carried, the media never fully covered it. This allowed it to fall into the hands of anonymous commentators with much less to lose by offering their unbiased opinions, who then gained the media spotlight by presenting their professional and unprofessional views alike, each with equal publicity. On the other hand, Collins came out himself in a major sports publication, and dozens of professional organizations had their views to offer in the aftermath of his announcement, which all had greater media influence than singular opinions that gained coverage because of the lack of media oversight. The exhibit seems to possess more than what meets eye regarding the actual views on homophobia and transphobia.
Differentiating between the common perspectives in professional media and anonymous voices on social media requires a greater understanding of social pressures. After Tom Bradley lost the California’s gubernatorial election in 1982, many wondered why the exit polls had indicated that he would come away with the victory. After the polls proved to be legitimate, many theories suggested that people were pressured into lying after they voted and telling pollsters that they had voted for the black candidate, even if they had not. We will not debate the relevance of the Bradley Effect in politics and voting, as Jane Kim provides the necessary coverage in her ​Columbia Journalism Review​ article. But at its crux in the social spotlight, the Bradley Effect speaks an essential truth of which we must acknowledge going further. Those under the spotlight will lie about their actual opinions in the hopes of being seen as embodying the social norm, while those with nothing to lose have no fear in communicating their rather unfiltered opinions. We must examine the atmospheres for which each situation came up to understand why their circumstances garnered far different reactions.

“The Art of Coming Out: Traditional and Social Media Frames Surrounding the NBA’s Jason Collins” examines the media response to Jason Collins’ ​Sports Illustrated​ announcement. They found that by solely looking at major publications, “this scholarship points to the potentially dangerous downside of increased media attention: that visibility comes at a price, a false substitute for cultural acceptance and inclusive citizenship” (Billings et al. 27). By controlling the professional responses to the announcement, “Media narratives all too often celebrate a postgay rights era, assuming that civil rights struggles have been won and equality has been achieved. What results is a culture eager to consume ‘the images of gay life’ but all too reluctant to embrace the realities of gay identities” (Billings et al. 28). Evidently, the offered narrative surrounding Jason Collins’s coming out did not garner the perfect reaction that the media offered. There still seems to be problems plaguing professional athletes that have caused not a single NBA, NHL, MLB, or NFL athlete to announce their homosexual identity in the years following Collins. In the end, “The Art of Coming Out” primarily discovered that “News discourses fail to address institutional homophobia in sports, but also often falsely mischaracterize the sports world as an open, democratic civil rights battleground that leads the way toward greater inclusion in all walks of life” (Billings et al. 54). Why did everyone portray the Collins situation as revolutionary when ​Sports Illustrated​ themselves had to disable comments on the cover story because “things were getting too ugly down there” on Facebook (Simpson)? Perhaps Jeffrey Cohen’s “Monster Culture (Seven Theses)” can explain what obscured the truth about the actual reactions to Collins. Cohen’s “Monster Culture ” studies the differences in our society and how the marginalized become categorized as monstrous: “One kind of difference becomes another as the normative categories of gender, sexuality...slide together like the imbricated circles of a Venn diagram, abjecting from the center that which becomes the monster” (11). He points out that “the monster” is “too transgressive, perversely erotic...and so the monster and all that it embodies must be exiled or destroyed” (16). He describes the monster’s body as “[incorporating] fear, desire, anxiety and fantasy” (4). It is difficult to capture and hard to understand, but it is characterized by that which we feel uncomfortable with and wish to get rid of, primarily because it represents a truth for which we do not want to accept. It threatens to force us to change the way we view the world and disregard preconceived notions in favor of making us see the truth. The “monster” in our story is hard to pin down, but the recent discussion of political correctness in politics may offer a unique vantage point in solving our previous inquiries.

From television show cancellations to executive removals to forced selling of franchises, political correctness has been a major talking point and cause of indignation across the professional world. Fifty-two percent of the population is against the country becoming more politically correct, and has caused the “PC” abbreviation to become a hot button topic across the United States (Montanaro). Political correctness has certainly asked us “to reevaluate our cultural opinions about race, gender, sexuality” and our “perception of difference” (Cohen 20). However noble the intentions of the politically correct movement, it certainly has caused a distrust among Americans that have come to see people like them lose their jobs by the dozens over opinions they share. Consequently, executives and individuals with power have since been much less outspoken on social issues and keep their quiet in favor of keeping their job intact. This falls in place relative to Billings’ (et al.) media framing study surrounding Jason Collins, as the media-controlled narratives only represented those who congratulated Collins. In fact, the very same people that had congratulated Collins on coming out were the same people that had declared opposing sentiments years prior. LeBron James, a star NBA player that is now widely regarded as one of the most socially-forward athletes in sports history (Martinelli), did not sing the same tune about homosexuality in basketball years before. In 2007–right after John Ameici came out post-retirement from the NBA–James remarked, “With teammates you have to be trustworthy...and if you're gay and you're not admitting that you are, then you are not trustworthy” (Simpson). It is important to note that even the most forward thinking voices of today may not have conveyed their truest opinions when certain social movements were less prevalent. This is not to say that James has not been sincere about his changes, but James and other athletes had much different voices before the spotlight struck and political correctness ensured that such a statement would not go unnoticed. If LeBron, one of the most popular athletes of today, would speak like this, who is to say that less progressive leaders actually share the opinions that they supposedly have? We can see that it is much more likely that organizations and individuals that come out and denounce other acts simply do so to hold a higher public opinion and not because they feel morally obligated to speak the politically progressive and popular ideas.

By collecting this set of information, we notice that the Human Rights Campaign’s prediction has certainly not come to fruition since Collins came out. But by analyzing the “monster” and understanding society’s fears, we can produce a grander statement about progressiveness today. We often notice new progressive ideas in the media rising on the horizon, but practically, they are very difficult to actualize in everyday life. Due to media framings, we would not notice that society is less like the Collins story portrays, and more like the Howard story does. We have a long way to go in not only becoming more accepting in our sports, but also in every social issue that we seem to be making progress on. Though there is no easy solution to forcing our entire culture to become more accepting, a good first step is assigning less media coverage to the professionals and more coverage and accountability to that everyday Twitter troll.

From transgender rights to immigration issues affecting our country everyday, it is important that we, as the audience in the media, exit the popular self-congratulating culture that comes with having a closed off lens of what people really think when it comes to social issues. Rather than focus on what people like ourselves have to say, continue to hold those with smaller audiences accountable for their regressive views. Engage with new websites and social media pages that hold opinions far off from our own, and most importantly, acknowledge that even though our opinions are less popular on such pages, the messages we spread do not fall on deaf ears, since the true deaf ears are those with the same exact opinions as us. Unfortunately, the trolls may better represent how our society leans, and we need to start from ground zero in combating these backwards social ideas. It is time that we shift the spotlight from those with their real opinions to share, not those pressured by the Bradley Effect.

Works Cited
Billings, Andrew C., et al. "The Art of Coming Out: Traditional and Social Media Frames
Surrounding the NBA's Jason Collins." Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, vol. 92, no. 1, 2015, pp. 142-160. ProQuest, http://ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.ezproxy.cul.colu mbia.edu/docview/1660483915?accountid=10226, doi:http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/10.1177/1077699014560516.

Bloomekatz, Ari, and Joseph Serna. “Openly Gay Athlete Jason Collins Is What 'We've All Been Waiting For'.” Los Angeles Times, Los Angeles Times Communications LLC, 29 Apr. 2013, www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-xpm-2013-apr-29-la-me-ln-jason-collins-gay-courageo us-20130429-story.html.

Brown, Anna. “Transgender Issues Sharply Divide Republicans, Democrats.” Pew Research Center, The Pew Charitable Trusts, 8 Nov. 2017, www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/11/08/transgender-issues-divide-republicans-and-democrats/.

Buzinski, Jim. “There Aren't Any out Gay Male Athletes in Major Professional Sports.” Outsports​, Vox Media, Inc., 15 Nov. 2017, www.outsports.com/2017/11/15/16620066/out-gay-sport-robbie-rogers.

Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome. “Monster Culture (Seven Theses).” Monster Theory: Reading Culture, edited by Jeffrey Jerome Cohen. Minneapolis, Minnesota, University of Minnesota Press, 1996, pp. 3-25.

Gomez, Jesus. “Kobe Explains Why He and Howard Never Got Along.” ​SBNation,​ Vox Media, Inc., 26 Feb. 2015,
www.sbnation.com/nba/2015/2/26/8116095/kobe-bryant-dwight-howard-lakers. Kim, Jane. “The Bradley Effect, Redux.” Columbia Journalism Review, 13 Oct. 2008,
archives.cjr.org/campaign_desk/the_bradley_effect_redux.php.

Kimmel, Michael S. “Masculinity as Homophobia: Fear, Shame, and Silence in the Construction of Gender Identity.” College Men and Masculinities: Theory, Research, and Implications for Practice. Ed. Shaun R. Harper and Frank Harris. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2010. 25-42. Print.

Lopez, German. “We Asked US Voters about Their Views on Transgender People. Here's What They Said.” Vox, Vox Media, Inc., 24 May 2016, www.vox.com/2016/5/24/11746086/transgender-bathrooms-poll-survey.

Martinelli, Michelle R. “People Are Applauding LeBron for Refusing to 'Shut up and Dribble'.” USA Today​, Gannett Satellite Information Network, 31 July 2018, ftw.usatoday.com/2018/07/lebron-james-nba-school-ohio-twitter-shut-up-and-dribble.

Montanaro, Domenico. “Warning To Democrats: Most Americans Against U.S. Getting More Politically Correct.” NPR, 19 Dec. 2018, www.npr.org/2018/12/19/677346260/warning-to-democrats-most-americans-against-u-s-getting-more-politically-correct.

Simpson, Connor. “Is the Sports World Ready to Accept the New Reality of Jason Collins?” The Atlantic, Atlantic Media Company, 30 Oct. 2013, www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2013/04/jason-collins-gay-reactions/315793/.

“Twitter's Homophobia On Full Display After Bombshell Allegations Against Dwight Howard.” News One, Interactive One, LLC, 27 Nov. 2018, newsone.com/playlist/twitters-homophobia-dwight-howard/.